Theory Assignment – 1

1) Difference between HTTP and HTTPS

HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It is a protocol used for communication between a web browser
and a web server. In HTTP, the data is transferred in plain text, which means anyone who intercepts the
communication can read or modify the data. Because of this, HTTP is not secure and is not recommended
for websites that handle sensitive information such as login credentials or payment details.

HTTPS stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure. It is the secure version of HTTP and uses SSL/TLS
encryption to protect data during transmission. In HTTPS, the information exchanged between the browser
and the server is encrypted, ensuring confidentiality, data integrity, and authentication. HTTPS also
helps in building user trust and improves website ranking in search engines.

In summary, HTTP is fast but insecure, whereas HTTPS provides secure and reliable communication over
the web.

2) Define Web Architecture

Web architecture refers to the overall structure and design of a web application. It explains how
different components such as the client, server, database, and network interact with each other to
deliver content and services to users. A well-designed web architecture ensures better scalability,
performance, security, and easy maintenance of the application.
In a typical web architecture, the client is usually a web browser that sends requests to the server.
The server processes these requests, communicates with the database when required, and then sends
responses back to the client. Modern web applications often follow multi-tier architecture, such as
three-tier architecture, which includes presentation layer, application layer, and data layer.
Web architecture plays an important role in building efficient, reliable, and scalable web systems.


3) Difference between ARIA and WAI-ARIA

ARIA stands for Accessible Rich Internet Applications. It is a set of attributes that can be added to
HTML elements to improve accessibility, especially for dynamic content and interactive components such
as buttons, forms, menus, and dialog boxes.

WAI-ARIA stands for Web Accessibility Initiative – Accessible Rich Internet Applications. It is the
official specification developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) under the Web Accessibility
Initiative. WAI-ARIA defines the rules, roles, states, and properties that developers should follow to
make web content accessible to people with disabilities.
In simple terms, ARIA refers to the accessibility features used in web development, while WAI-ARIA
provides the official guidelines and standards for implementing ARIA correctly.


4) Behind the Screen – How the Web Works

When a user types a website URL in a browser and presses Enter, several processes take place behind the
screen. First, the browser contacts the Domain Name System (DNS) server to convert the domain name into
an IP address. Once the IP address is obtained, the browser sends an HTTP or HTTPS request to the web
server.
The web server receives the request, processes it, and sends back the required files such as HTML, CSS,
and JavaScript. The browser then interprets these files, creates the DOM tree, applies styles, executes
scripts, and finally displays the webpage on the screen.
This entire process happens within a few seconds and allows users to access websites smoothly and
efficiently.


5) Define CDN

CDN stands for Content Delivery Network. It is a system of distributed servers located in different
geographical locations around the world. The main purpose of a CDN is to deliver website content faster
and more efficiently to users.
When a user requests a webpage, the CDN delivers the content from the nearest server instead of the
original server. This reduces loading time, improves website performance, and reduces traffic load on
the main server. CDNs are commonly used to deliver images, videos, stylesheets, and JavaScript files.


6) Define DNS

DNS stands for Domain Name System. It is a core system of the internet that converts human-readable
domain names into IP addresses. Since computers use IP addresses to identify each other, DNS helps
users access websites easily without remembering numeric addresses.
DNS works like a phone directory for the internet. When a domain name is entered in the browser, DNS
servers find the corresponding IP address and connect the browser to the correct web server. Without
DNS, accessing websites would be difficult and time-consuming.


7) Explain what is the smallest JavaScript file which you can execute in web.
JavaScript is a lightweight, interpreted programming language that runs directly in the web browser. 
To execute JavaScript on theweb, only a very small amount of code is required, which shows how flexible 
and easy it is to use for web development. In fact, the smallest JavaScript file that can be executed in
a browser can contain just a single valid statement. This could be something as simple as a console log statement,
an alert, or even a single variable declaration.
A JavaScript file does not require any special structure, classes, or functions to run. As long as the file contains valid 
JavaScript syntax and is properly linked to an HTML page using the <script> tag, the browser will execute it. For example,
even a file with only one line of code like console.log("Hello World"); or var x = 10; is enough to be considered executable.
This demonstrates the simplicity of JavaScript and why it is widely used for adding interactivity and small functionality
 to web pages.
Even minimal JavaScript files can perform meaningful tasks. The browser reads the code, interprets it, and executes it
immediately, allowing developers to test small functions or debug larger applications in small increments. The ability to
run small files independently also helps beginners learn programming concepts easily, without the need for complex setups
or frameworks.
In conclusion, the smallest JavaScript file that can be executed on the web is one that contains at least one valid JavaScript 
statement. It must be properly linked to an HTML page for the browser to interpret and execute it. This minimal requirement
 highlights the efficiency and flexibility of JavaScript, making it an essential language for web development.
For example, a valid minimal JavaScript file could be:

console.log("Hello World");

8)Complete DOM Manipulation

The Document Object Model (DOM) is a programming interface for web documents. It represents the structure of a webpage as a tree
of objects, where each element, attribute, and text node is an oject that can be accessed and manipulated using JavaScript.
DOM manipulation allows developers to change the content, structure, and style of a webpage dynamically, without reloading
the page.
Using DOM manipulation, we can perform a variety of actions on a webpage. For example, we can access elements using methods like
getElementById(), getElementsByClassName(), getElementsByTagName(), and querySelector(). Once an element is accessed, we can
modify its content using innerHTML or textContent, change its attributes with setAttribute(), update styles using the style
property, and even add or remove elements from the page using methods like appendChild(), removeChild(), and replaceChild().
DOM manipulation also allows us to handle events, such as clicks, mouse movements, or keyboard inputs. Event listeners can be
added to elements using addEventListener(), which executes a function when a specific event occurs. This enables interactivity
on the webpage, such as form validation, dropdown menus, sliders, or dynamic content updates.In summary, complete DOM
manipulation involves accessing elements, modifying their content and attributes, updating styles, creating or removing elements
and handling events. Mastering DOM manipulation is essential for creating dynamic, interactive, and user-friendly web 
applications.

9)explore npm and npx

NPM stands for Node Package Manager and is a tool that comes with Node.js. It is used to manage and install packages or libraries
that can be used in JavaScript projects. With npm, developers can easily download, update, and maintain reusable code modules 
rom the npm registry, which contains thousands of open-source packages. For example, if a project needs a library like
Express.js, it can be installed using the npm command npm install express. NPM also allows developers to manage project 
dependencies, specify package versions, and create scripts to automate tasks.

NPX stands for Node Package Execute and is a companion tool that comes with npm version 5.2 and above. It is used to run
packages without installing them globally. This is particularly useful for running command-line tools or one-time scripts
directly from the npm registry. For example, instead of installing a package globally to use it once, you can run npx
create-react-app myapp to create a new React application without permanently installing the create-react-app package on your 
system.
In summary, npm is primarily used to install, manage, and maintain packages, while npx is used to execute packages
directly without global installation. Both tools are essential for modern JavaScript development and help developers
work efficiently by reusing code and managing dependencies





